Wallet Attestation (#623)
italia/eidas-it-wallet-docs: docs/en/mobile-instance-registration.rst

.. _mobile-instance-app-initialization-and-registration.rst:

Mobile Application Instance Initialization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Since the initialization flows are analogous for a Wallet or Mobile Relying Party Instance, these components are henceforth called Mobile Application Instances. Similarly, the Application Provider fulfills the roles of the Wallet Provider and Relying Party backend depending on the registration process.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the initialization flows are analogous for a Wallet or Mobile Relying Party Instance, these components are henceforth called Mobile Application Instances. Similarly, the Application Provider fulfills the roles of the Wallet Provider and Relying Party Backend depending on the registration process.   
```

.. figure:: ../../images/application_instance_initialization.svg
    :figwidth: 100%
    :align: center
    :target: https://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/svg/VLDDRzim3BthLn3QOItG_O406vhri1NRWA3xE0KeQ8cnXTYIHahPykydsnbSsq4l0iAyzyZtIDzBGawvQnNc57pkAcBLE4jm225LuQzIRtS5uOoBw9CeD2amw9z2h045iXH2d12WluNAjGJR65jdCBdWuT6NDjxGmC0OOSxuGcVOfaIIHlXszoWZ59F06udiV5qpaP_pNhROSJWvImmVqHp9su5VcQDI_OJlFfIk6_YAsPi6KaE04xVtv4wOXg9IvRd07neoHt27WM3fv0n1HvHaA7JEkovt86GoktG6fj_PCNLKSjfxzBQdNlC6o0HuGjTYrTAbOvbr0qz5ea11QzDWsvAlIUjfli5FUIxeJ-I9-_g1IPe5QS2DHXR_M9e9JeOdmGS-nnHgnjWu0v-HxHzawiq8H7GCDretb-hpaSxFCLTQty6ookwazUqOXgJ0hod33wnNkWdh8l1_Haoo0H-y8NWFrjKawMRcxGxM_B6wdlPsohKNLgf_Bqsc9BJk2JXjK6lO-ohauYY5SPYHEeMzPYXBYsRJpbS6LlHhhbuvYr_OEblgwuDO8rRDPhZlmygkHxhtwr0NPzSlzObg9ua7yV93Ol12Qdc3bbRVO179GhoPAqWsXaGEkLNtv6tksdy0

    Mobile Application Instance Initialization Sequence Diagram

> **Step 1**: The User starts the Mobile Application Instance mobile app for the first time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Step 1**: The User starts the Mobile Application Instance for the first time.
```

**Step 2**: The Mobile Application Instance:

  * Checks whether the device meets the minimum security requirements.
  * Checks if the Key Attestation API is available.

.. note::

    **Federation Check**: The Mobile Application Instance needs to check if the Application Provider is part of the Federation, obtaining its protocol-specific Metadata. Non-normative examples of a response from the :ref:`Federation endpoint` with the **Entity Configuration** and the **Metadata** of the Application Provider are presented within the :ref:`Wallet Provider Entity Configuration` and :ref:`Entity Configuration of Relying Parties` sections.

**Steps 3-5 (Nonce Retrieval)**: The Mobile Application Instance requests a one-time ``nonce`` from the :ref:`Nonce endpoint` of the Application Provider Backend. This ``nonce`` MUST be unpredictable to serve as the main defense against replay attacks. 

> Upon a successful request, the Application Provider Backend generates and returns the ``nonce`` value to the Mobile Application Instance. The backend MUST ensure that it is single-use and valid only within a specific time frame. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon a successful request, the Application Provider Backend generates and returns the ``nonce`` value to the Mobile Application Instance. The Application Provider Backend MUST ensure that it is single-use and valid only within a specific time frame. 
```

  4. If the previous points are satisfied, it MUST store the ``hardware_key_tag`` in local storage.

.. note::

  **WSCD**: The Mobile Application Instance MAY use a local WSCD for cryptographic operations, including key generation, secure storage, and cryptographic processing,  on devices that support this feature. On Android devices, Strongbox is RECOMMENDED; Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) MAY be used only when Strongbox is unavailable. For iOS devices, Secure Elements (SE) MUST be used. Given that each OEM offers a distinct SDK for accessing the local WSCD, the discussion hereafter will address this topic in a general context.

  If the WSCD fails during any of these operations, for example due to hardware limitations, it will raise an error response to the Mobile Application Instance. The Mobile Application Instance MUST handle these errors accordingly to ensure secure operation. Details on error handling are left to the Mobile Application Instance implementation.

> **Step 7**: The Mobile Application Instance uses the Key Attestation API, providing the ``clientDataHash`` to acquire the Key Attestation.

Reviewer: Consistency with terminology in diagram.

```suggestion
**Step 7**: The Mobile Application Instance uses the Key Attestation API, providing the ``client_data_hash`` to acquire the Key Attestation.
```

  These services, specifically developed by the manufacturer, are integrated within the Android or iOS SDKs, eliminating the need for a predefined endpoint to access them. Additionally, as they are specifically developed for mobile architecture, they do not need to be registered as Federation Entities through national registration systems.
  *Secure Enclave* has been available on Apple devices since the iPhone 5s (2013).
  For Android devices, the inclusion of **Strongbox Keymaster** may vary by manufacturer, who decides whether to include it or not.

If any errors occur in the Key Attestation API process, such as device integrity verification, for example, due to unavailable Key Attestation APIs, an internal error, or an invalid nonce in the integrity request, the Key Attestation APIs raise an error response. The Mobile Application Instance MUST process these errors accordingly. Details on error handling are left to the Mobile Application Instance implementation.
 

**Step 8**: The Key Attestation API performs the following actions:

> * Creates a Key Attestation that is linked with the provided ``clientDataHash`` and the public key of the Application Instance Hardware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Creates a Key Attestation that is linked with the provided ``client_data_hash`` and the public key of the Application Instance Hardware.
```

* Incorporates information pertaining to the device's security.
* Uses an OEM private key to sign the Key Attestation, therefore verifiable with the related OEM certificate, confirming that the Cryptographic Hardware Keys are securely managed by the operating system.

**Step 9 (Mobile Application Instance Initialization Request)**: The Mobile Application Instance sends a request to the :ref:`Mobile Application Instance Initialization Request` of the Application Provider Backend to register the Mobile Application Instance, identified by the Cryptographic Hardware Key public key. 
The request body includes the following claims: the ``nonce``, Key Attestation (``key_attestation``), and Cryptographic Hardware Key Tag (``hardware_key_tag``).

.. note::
  It is not necessary to send the Application Instance Hardware public key because it is already included in the ``key_attestation``.

>   As seen in the previous steps, the Key Attestation API creates a Key Attestation linked to the provided ``clientDataHash`` which is the digest of the Application Provider's ``nonce``, the public key of the Application Instance Hardware and its Hardware Key Tag. This process eliminates the need to send the Application Instance Hardware public key directly, as it is already included in the key attestation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  As seen in the previous steps, the Key Attestation API creates a Key Attestation linked to the provided ``client_data_hash`` which is the digest of the Application Provider's ``nonce``, the public key of the Application Instance Hardware and its Hardware Key Tag. This process eliminates the need to send the Application Instance Hardware public key directly, as it is already included in the key attestation. 
```

**Steps 10-12 (Mobile Application Instance Initialization Response)**: The Application Provider validates the ``nonce`` and ``key_attestation`` signature, therefore:

  1. It MUST verify that the ``nonce`` was generated by Application Provider and has not already been used.

>   2. It MUST validate the ``key_attestation`` as defined by the device manufacturers' guidelines. The Application Provider MUST also verify the binding between the received ``hardware_key_tag``, ``hardware_key_pub`` and ``nonce`` with the ``clientDataHash`` provided in the Key Attestation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. It MUST validate the ``key_attestation`` as defined by the device manufacturers' guidelines. The Application Provider MUST also verify the binding between the received ``hardware_key_tag``, ``hardware_key_pub`` and ``nonce`` with the ``client_data_hash`` provided in the Key Attestation.
```

  4. If these checks are passed, it MUST register the Mobile Application Instance, keeping the Cryptographic Hardware Key Tag (``hardware_key_tag``), the Public Hardware Key (``hardware_key_pub``) and possibly other useful information related to the device.

Upon successful initialization of the Mobile Application Instance, the Application Provider responds with a confirmation of success.

**Steps 13-14**: The Mobile Application Instance has been initialized and becomes operational.

.. note:: **Threat Model**: while the initialization endpoint does not necessitate authenticating the client, it is safeguarded through the use of `key_attestation`. Proper validation of this attestation permits the initialization of authentic and unaltered app instances. Any other claims submitted will not undergo validation, leading the endpoint to respond with an error. Additionally, the inclusion of a nonce helps prevent replay attacks. The authenticity of both the nonce and the ``hardware_key_tag`` is ensured by the signature found within the ``key_attestation``.

Nonce Request
...............

> The request for a nonce MUST be an HTTP GET request sent to the Application Provider’s Nonce Endpoint.

Reviewer: Remove normative language, since these are non-normative guidelines (the actual implementation is left at the Provider's discretion as specified in the notes).

```suggestion
The request for a nonce is an HTTP GET request sent to the Application Provider’s Nonce Endpoint.
```

Below is a non-normative example of a Nonce Request.

.. code-block:: http

    GET /nonce HTTP/1.1
    Host: application-provider.example.com

Nonce Response
..............

> Upon a successful request, the Application Instance Provider returns e.g., an HTTP response with a 200 OK status code. The response MUST contain the ``nonce``. Details on this implementation are left to the Application Provider

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Upon a successful request, the Application Instance Provider returns e.g., an HTTP response with a 200 OK status code. The response MUST contain the ``nonce``. Details on this implementation are left to the Application Provider.
```

  - *error*. The error code.
  - *error_description*. Text in human-readable form providing further details to clarify the nature of the error encountered.

.. code-block:: http
    :caption: Non-normative example of a Nonce Error Response
    :name: code_ApplicationProvider_Endpoint_Nonce_Error
    
    HTTP/1.1 500 Internal Server Error
    Content-Type: application/json

    {
        "error": "server_error",
        "error_description": "The server encountered an unexpected error."
    }

The following table lists HTTP Status Codes and related error codes that are supported for the error response:

.. list-table::
    :widths: 30 20 50
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **HTTP Status Code**
      - **Error Code**
      - **Description**
    * - ``500 Internal Server Error``
      - ``server_error``
      - The request cannot be fulfilled because the Nonce Endpoint encountered an internal problem.
    * - ``503 Service Unavailable``
      - ``temporarily_unavailable``
      - The request cannot be fulfilled because the Nonce Endpoint is temporarily unavailable (e.g., due to maintenance or overload).

Mobile Application Instance Initialization Request

> ..................................................

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mobile Application Instance Initialization Request
............................................................
```

> To register a Mobile Application Instance, the request to the Application Provider MUST use the HTTP POST method with ``Content-Type`` set to `application/json`. The request body MUST contain the following claims:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To register a Mobile Application Instance, the request to the Application Provider uses the HTTP POST method with ``Content-Type`` set to `application/json`. The request body contains the following claims:
```

.. _table_http_request_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Claim**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **nonce**

>       - It MUST be set to the value obtained from the Application Provider through the Nonce Endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - The value obtained from the Application Provider through the Nonce Endpoint.
```

      - This specification.
    * - **hardware_key_tag**

>       - It MUST be set with the unique identifier of the **Cryptographic Hardware Keys** and encoded in base64url.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - The unique identifier of the **Cryptographic Hardware Keys** and encoded in ``base64url``.
```

      - This specification.
    * - **key_attestation**

>       - It MUST be an attestation which guarantees the secure generation, storage and usage of the key pair generated by the Mobile Application Instance. This can be an array containing a certificate chain whose leaf certificate is the Key Attestation obtained from the device **Key Attestation APIs**, signed with the device hardware key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - An attestation that guarantees the secure generation, storage and usage of the key pair generated by the Mobile Application Instance. This can be an array containing a certificate chain whose leaf certificate is the Key Attestation obtained from the device **Key Attestation APIs**, signed with the device hardware key.
```

      - This specification.

Below is a non-normative example of a Mobile Application Instance Initialization Request.

.. code-block:: http

    POST /application-instances HTTP/1.1
    Host: application-provider.example.com
    Content-Type: application/json

    {
      "nonce": "d2JhY2NhbG91cmVqdWFuZGFt",
      "key_attestation": "o2NmbXRvYXBwbGUtYXBw... redacted",
      "hardware_key_tag": "WQhyDymFKsP95iFqpzdEDWW4l7aVna2Fn4JCeWHYtbU="
    }

Mobile Application Instance Initialization Response

> ......................................................

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mobile Application Instance Initialization Response
................................................................
```

If a Mobile Application Instance Initialization Request is successfully validated, the Application Provider provides an HTTP Response with status code 204 (No Content).

Below is a non-normative example of a Mobile Application Instance Initialization Response.

.. code-block:: http

    HTTP/1.1 204 No content

If any errors occur during the Mobile Application Instance initialization, an error response MUST be returned.

Mobile Application Instance Initialization Error Response
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> The following errors apply to all Application Instance Management Initialization and MUST be supported for the error response, unless otherwise specified:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following errors apply to all Application Instance Initialization:
```

.. _mobile-instance-app-initialization-and-registration.rst:

Mobile Application Instance Initialization and Registration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Since the registration flows are analogous for a Wallet or Relying Party Instance, these components are henceforth called Mobile Application Instance. Similarly, the Application Provider fulfills the roles of the Wallet Provider and Relying Party backend depending on the registration process.   

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since the registration flows are analogous for a Wallet or Relying Party Instance, these components are henceforth called Mobile Application Instances. Similarly, the Application Provider fulfills the roles of the Wallet Provider and Relying Party backend depending on the registration process.   
```

> Since the registration flows are analogous for a Wallet or Relying Party Instance, these components are henceforth called Mobile Application Instances. Similarly, the Application Provider fulfills the roles of the Wallet Provider and Relying Party backend depending on the registration process.   

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Since the registration flows are analogous for a Wallet or Mobile Relying Party Instance, these components are henceforth called Mobile Application Instances. Similarly, the Application Provider fulfills the roles of the Wallet Provider and Relying Party backend depending on the registration process.   
```

  If the WSCD fails during any of these operations, for example due to hardware limitations, it will raise an error response to the Mobile Application Instance. The Mobile Application Instance MUST handle these errors accordingly to ensure secure operation. Details on error handling are left to the Mobile Application Instance implementation.

**Step 7**: The Mobile Application Instance uses the Key Attestation API, providing the ``nonce`` to acquire the Key Attestation.

.. note::

  **Key Attestation API**: In this section, the Key Attestation API is assumed to be provided by device manufacturer. This service allows the verification of a key being securely stored within the device's hardware through a signed object. Additionally, it offers verifiable proof that a specific Mobile Application Instance is authentic, unaltered, and in its original state using a specialized signed document made for this purpose.

>   The service also incorporates details in the signed object, such as the device type, model, app version, operating system version, bootloader status, and other relevant information to assess whether the device has been compromised. For Android, the Key Attestation APIS is represented by *Key Attestation*, a feature supported by *StrongBox Keymaster*, which is a physical HSM installed directly on the motherboard, and the *TEE* (Trusted Execution Environment), a secure area of the main processor. *Key Attestation* aims to provide a way to strongly determine if a key pair is hardware-backed, what the properties of the key are, and what constraints are applied to its usage. Developers can leverage its functionality through the *Play Integrity API*. For Apple devices, the Key Attestation APIS are represented by *DeviceCheck*, which provides a framework and server interface to manage device-specific data securely. *DeviceCheck* is used in combination with the *Secure Enclave*, a dedicated HSM integrated into Apple's SoCs. *DeviceCheck* can be used to attest to the integrity of the device, apps, and/or encryption keys generated on the device, ensuring they were created in a secure environment like *Secure Enclave*. Developers can leverage *DeviceCheck* functionality by using the framework itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The service also incorporates details in the signed object, such as the device type, model, app version, operating system version, bootloader status, and other relevant information to assess whether the device has been compromised. For Android, the Key Attestation API is represented by *Key Attestation*, a feature supported by *StrongBox Keymaster*, which is a physical HSM installed directly on the motherboard, and the *TEE* (Trusted Execution Environment), a secure area of the main processor. *Key Attestation* aims to provide a way to strongly determine if a key pair is hardware-backed, what the properties of the key are, and what constraints are applied to its usage. Developers can leverage its functionality through the *Play Integrity API*. For Apple devices, the Key Attestation API is represented by *DeviceCheck*, which provides a framework and server interface to manage device-specific data securely. *DeviceCheck* is used in combination with the *Secure Enclave*, a dedicated HSM integrated into Apple's SoCs. *DeviceCheck* can be used to attest to the integrity of the device, apps, and/or encryption keys generated on the device, ensuring they were created in a secure environment like *Secure Enclave*. Developers can leverage *DeviceCheck* functionality by using the framework itself.
```

  These services, specifically developed by the manufacturer, are integrated within the Android or iOS SDKs, eliminating the need for a predefined endpoint to access them. Additionally, as they are specifically developed for mobile architecture, they do not need to be registered as Federation Entities through national registration systems.
  *Secure Enclave* has been available on Apple devices since the iPhone 5s (2013).
  For Android devices, the inclusion of **Strongbox Keymaster** may vary by manufacturer, who decides whether to include it or not.

> If any errors occur in any Key Attestation APIS process, such as device integrity verification, for example, due to unavailable Key Attestation APIs, an internal error, or an invalid challenge in the integrity request, the Key Attestation APIS raise an error response. The Mobile Application Instance MUST process these errors accordingly. Details on error handling are left to the Mobile Application Instance implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If any errors occur in any Key Attestation API process, such as device integrity verification, for example, due to unavailable Key Attestation APIs, an internal error, or an invalid challenge in the integrity request, the Key Attestation APIs raise an error response. The Mobile Application Instance MUST process these errors accordingly. Details on error handling are left to the Mobile Application Instance implementation.
```

Author: already modified in a commit below

        "error_description": "The server encountered an unexpected error."
    }

The following table lists HTTP Status Codes and related error codes that are supported for the error response:

.. list-table::
    :widths: 30 20 50
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **HTTP Status Code**
      - **Error Code**
      - **Description**
    * - ``500 Internal Server Error``
      - ``server_error``
      - The request cannot be fulfilled because the Nonce Endpoint encountered an internal problem.
    * - ``503 Service Unavailable``
      - ``temporarily_unavailable``
      - The request cannot be fulfilled because the Nonce Endpoint is temporarily unavailable (e.g., due to maintenance or overload).

Mobile Application Instance Registration Request
..................................................

To register a Mobile Application Instance, the request to the Application Provider MUST use the HTTP POST method with ``Content-Type`` set to `application/json`. The request body MUST contain the following claims:

.. _table_http_request_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Claim**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **challenge**

>       - MUST be set to the value obtained from the Application Provider through the Nonce Endpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - It MUST be set to the value obtained from the Application Provider through the Nonce Endpoint.
```
